# Chapter 2 - Humidity & Aerosol

## Humidity Defined

- **Humidity** is the quantity of moisture in air or gas that is caused by the addition of water in a gaseous state (vapor). It is also referred as *molecular water* or *invisible moisture*.

> :warning: The objective of humidity therapy is to make up for water loss that occurs when dry gas, more than 4 L/min, is delivered or when the upper airway is bypassed. Prolonged inhalation  of dry gas may damage the epithelial layer of the airway, reduce ciliary activity, and increase the production of thick mucus due to dehydration.

## Clinical Uses of Humidity

- To humidify dry therapeutic gases when flow is greater than 4L/min.
- To provide 100% body humidity of the inspired gas for patients with ET tubes
  or tracheostomy tubes.

## Normal Airway Humidification

- The nose warms, humidifies, and filters inspired air.
- The pharynx,trachea, and bronchial tree also warm, humidify, and filter
  inspired air.
- By the time inspired air reaches the oropharynx, it has been warmed to
  approximately 34° C and is 80% to 90% saturated with H<sub>2</sub>O.
- By the time the inspired air reaches the carina, it has been warmed to body
  temperature (37° C) and is 100% saturated.
- When the inspired air is fully saturated (100%) at 37° C, it holds 44 mg
  H<sub>2</sub>O per liter of gas and exerts a water vapor pressure of 47 mmHg.

## Absolute and Relative Humidity

- Absolute humidity is the amount of water in a given volume of gas; its
  measurement is expressed in milligrams per liter.
- Relative humidity is a ratio between the amount of water in a given volume of
  gas and the maximum amount it is capable of holding at the temperature
(capacity). Its measurement is expressed as a percentage and is obtained with a
hygrometer.
- `Relative humidity = (Absolute humidity / Capacity) * 100`

> :question: The amount of moisture in a given volume of gas at 31° C is 24 mg H<sub>2</sub>O per liter of gas.
>
> Calculate the relative humidity.
>
> (Note: At 31° C, air can hold 32.01 mg H<sub>2</sub>O per liter.)

## Body Humidity

- Body humidity is the relative humidity at body temperature and is expressed as a percentage.
- `Body humidity = (absolute humidity / 44 mg/L) * 100`

> :warning: **The capacity of water at body temperature is 44 mg/L.**

## Humidity Deficit

- Inspired air, not fully saturated at body temperature creates humidity deficit. The deficit is corrected by the body's own humidification system.
- Humidity deficit may be expressed in milligrams per liter or as a percentage.
- **Humidity deficit = 44mg/L - absolute humidity**, or when expressed as a percent:
  - *(Humidity deficit (mg/L) ÷ 44 mg/L)* • 100

> :pencil2:
> An intubated patient attached to a T-piece is inspiring air from a nebulizer that contains 18 mg H<sub>2</sub>O per liter of air.
>
> What is this patient's humidity deficit?
>
> 44 mg/L - 18 mg/L = **26 mg/L**
>
> As a percentage:
>
> (26 mg/L ÷ 44 mg/L) • 100 = 59%

- This is why it is important to deliver humidified gas at body temperature to a patient with an artificial airway that bypasses the patient's upper airway.
- If adequate humidity is not provided, the patient's airway can dry out,which can lead to thickening of secretions and can result in increased airway resistance.
- Gas being delivered to a patient with an ET tube or tracheostomy that contains less than 44 mg/L of water per liter of gas or water vapor pressure of **less than 47 mmHg tends to dry secretions, making them thicker and more difficult to mobolize.**

## Efficiency of Humidifiers

- Duration of contact between the gas and water (longer duration results in increased humidity).
  - The higher the flow rate used, the less time of contact between the gas and water, and therefore the lower the humidity output.
  - The lower the water level in the jar, the less time of contact between the gas and water, and therefore the lower the humidity output.
- Surface area of gas and water contact (greater surface area results in increased humidity).
- Temperature of the gas and water (higher temperature results in increased humidity).

## Types of Humidifiers

- **Pass-over humidifier** (nonheated humidifier)
  - Gas simply passes over the surface of the wter, picking up moisture and delivering it to the patient.
  - Produces low humidification vecause of the limited time of gas and water contact and the small surface area involved
  - Provides a body humidity of approximately 25%

## Important Points Concerning Humidifiers

## Heat Moisture Exchanger

## AEROSOL THERAPY

## Aerosol defined

**Aerosol** is a suspension of water in particulate form (or a mist) in gas.

## Clinical Uses for Aerosol Therapy

## Hazards of Aerosol Therapy

## Characteristics of Aerosol Particles

## Types of Nebulizers (Pneumatic)

## Types of Nebulizers (Electric)

## Important Points Concerning Nebulizers
