# Chapter 3: Assessment of the Cardiopulmonary Patient

## Study Questions

- What is yellow sputum indicative of?
- What bacterial organism should be suspected if a patient's sputum is green and foul smelling?
- List nine causes of dyspnea.
- What does the term *orthopnea* mean, and in which patients is it most commonly found?
- Describe Kussmaul respirations and identify which patients most often exhibit this breathing pattern.
- List three conditions in which asymmetric chest movement may be observed.
- Describe paradoxical respiration and name a condition in which it is most commonly observed.
- Define pedal edema and identify its cause.
- Name a condition that results in the trachea shifting toward the side of the body that the condition is  affecting.
- Name a condition that results in the trachea shifting away from the affected side.
- Which muscles are used for normal ventilation?
- What causes the barrel chest appearance in patients with COPD?
- Name two conditions in which a hyperresonant percussion note would be heard.
- Name two conditions in which a dull percussion note would be heard.
- List four conditions that result in heart murmurs.
- List the normal values for the following electrolytes:
  - sodium
  - potassium
  - chloride
- Why would decreased sodium and potassium levels make weaning a patient from the ventilator more difficult?
- What does an elevated BUN level indicate?
- How does the respiratory system compensate when glucose levels increase in a diabetic patient?
- List the normal levels for each of the following:
  - RBC count
  - Hb level
  - Hct
  - WBC count
- What do decreases in Hb level, Hct, and RBC count indicate?
- Name two conditions that cause a decreased platelet count.
- Patients with a decreased platelet count and increased PT are at greater risk of what occurrence?

## I. PATIENT HISTORY

- The patient interview should obtain this information:
  - chief complaint
  - symptoms that the patient has and when they started
  - Past medical problems
  - Occupation
  - Medications currently prescribed
  - Allergies
  - Exercise tolerance and daily activities
  - Living environment
  - Nutritional status
  - social support systems available
  - smoking history
  - Alcohol or drug use

## II. ASSESSMENT OF SYMPTOMS

- **Common Symptoms in Pulmonary Disease**
  - **Cough:** aids in clearing the airway of secretions
    - Nonproductive cough is caused by:
      - Irritated airway
      - mucosal membranes
      - Presence of a growth
      - Irritated pleura
      - Irritated tympanic membrane
    - Productive cough sputum colors
      - White or translucent contains normal mucus
      - Yellow is infection, WBCs (purulent sputum)
      - Green is old sputum, if foul smelling suspect ***Pseudomonas***.
      - Brown is old blood
      - Red: contains fresh blood

   > :warning: Foul-smelling sputum that settles into layers is characteristic of ***bronchiectasis***.

  - When a cough  is productive, it is important to record the amount, consistency, odor and color of sputum because changes in these qualities over 24 hours are important in the diagnosis of pulmonary disease.
  - Sputum collection and laboratory analysis are important parts of the
   pulmonary assessment. Steps in sputum collection:
    - Explain to the patient the intent to collect a sample.
    - Good oral hygiene prevents the collection from being
    contaminated by oral secretions.
    - The sputum sample must be from a deep cough.
    - Aerosolized hypertonic saline makes patients cough up
    secretions.

  > :white_check_mark: If a patient cannot cough adequately, nasotracheal suctioning may be necessary to collect the sample. To collect the sputum, a sputum trap or a Lukens tube catheter is necessary.

  - Characteristics of a cough:
    - Bark-like cough usually indicates croup.
    - Harsh, dry cough with inspiratory stridor usually indicates
    upper airway problems.
    - Wheezing type coughs usually indicate lover airway pathology.
    - Chronic productive coughs are indicative of chronic
    bronchitis.
    - Prequent hacking cough and throat clearing may be the result
    of smoking or sinus or viral infection.
  
- **Dyspnea** is patient's complaint of difficult or labored breathing.
  - It is a subjective symptom, meaning that the patient expresses breathing difficulty, and can be influenced by their reactions and emotional state.

  > :white_check_mark: A patient who has dyspne of tachypnea is often said to be hyperventilating: however, the only way to determine whether someone is hyperventilating is to observe ABG results indicating a CO<sub>2</sub> level less than normal.

  - Causes of dyspnea:
    - Increased airway resistance
    - Upper airway obstruction
    - Asthma and other chronic lung diseases
    - Decreased lung compliance
    - Pulmonary fibrosis
    - Pneumothorax
    - Pleural effusion
    - Abnormal chest wall
    - Anxiety state, when there isno physiologic explanation

  - Types of dyspnea
    - Orthopnea is dyspnea while lying down. The condition is usually seen in patients with heart failure and is caused by increased congestionof the lungs while lying down. It is often observed in patients with emphyasema bcause of the inadequete diaphragmatic movement during ventiilaiton. It is often rreferrred to as 2-pillow or 3-pillow orthopnea to evaluate the number of pillow required to relieve dyspnea.
    - Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea is sudden onset of shortness of breath after being in bed for several hours. It is seen in cardiac patients and results in acute pulmonary edema, which usually subsides quickly after the patient is positioned upright.
    - Exertional dyspnea is often seen in patients with cardiopulmonary disease. The severity is determined by the amount of exertion. It is important to determine at what point the patinet experiences dyspnea: Does it begin after walking up a flight of stairs or after simply walking across the room?

- **Hemoptysis** is coughing up blood from the respiratory tract.
  - Varies in severity from blood-tinged or blood-streaked sputum to frank bleeding.
  - Massive hemptysis is defined as 400 mL of blood-tinged sputum in 2 hours or as more than 600 mL in 24 hours and is considered a life-threatening event. An adequate airway must be maintained immediately, with a bronchoscopy or surgery possible indicated.
  - Causes of hemoptysis:
    - Pneumonia
    - Tuberculosis (massive hemoptysis possible)
    - Lung abscess
    - Fungal lung infection: ***histoplasmosis***
    - Neoplasms: bronchogenic carcinoma (massive hemoptysis possible)
    - Pulmonary embolism
    - Valvular heart diseases
    - Mitral valve stenosis
  - Patients may think they are "coughing up blood" from the lungs when the blood is actually from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Thor origin of the blood must be determined, typically by bronchoscopy.

- **Chest pain**
  - The thoracic wall is the most common source of chest pain.
  - the pain may be from nerves, muscles, or the skin or bones of the thoracic wall.
  - The lung parenchyma is *not sensitive to pain*.
  - The parietal pleura (layer lining the ches wall) is very sensitive to pain and is usually the source of pain associated with pneumonias, pleurisy, and other inflammatory processess. Chest pain during inspiration is common.
  - Chest pain may be associated with pulmonary hypertension caused by the increased tension on the walls of the vessels and by increased worklaod on the right side of the heart.
  - Chest pain is also associated with a ruptured aorta, myocardial infartction, and esophageal problems.

## III. OTHER PHYSICAL ASSESSMENTS

- **Breathing Patterns**
  - **Eupnea:** the normal rate and depth of respirations.
    - Adults: 12 to 20 bpm.
    - Children: 15 to 25 bpm.
    - Newborn: 35 to 45 bpm (as high as 70 with excitement)
  - **Bradypnea:** less than the normal respiratory rate. May be seen with respiratory center depression caused by head trauma or drug overdose.
- **Apnea:** absence of breathing for a specific period of time (usually at least 10 seconds). Seen in patients with respiratory arrest caused by asphyxia, severe drug overdose, central and obstructive sleep apnea, and other central respiratory center disorders.
  - **Tachypnea:** faster than the normal respiratory rate but with the normal depth of breathing. May indicate decreased lung compliance and is associated with restrictive diseases, pneumonia, and pulmonary edema.
  - **Hypopnea:** shallow respirations (about half of normal depth) with slower than normal respiratory rate. Hypopnea is normal in well-conditioned athletes and is accompanied by a slow pulse rate. May be seen in patients with damage to the brainstem and is accompanied by a weak, rapid pulse or in patients with obstructive sleep apnea.
  - **Hyperpnea:** deep, rapid, and labored breathing. Associated with conditions on which there is an inadequate O<sub>2</sub> supply, such as cardiac and respiratory diseases. Usually refers to hyperventilation.
  - **Kussmaul respiration:** increased rate and depth of breathing. Usually seen in patients with severe metabolic acidosis (diabetic ketoacidosis).
  - **Biot respiration:** irregular breathing pattern characterized by short periods of deep, consistent volumes with periods of apnea. The apneic period may last 10 to 30 seconds. Associated with elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) or meningitis.
  - **Cheyne-Stokes respiration:** deep, rapid breathing followed by apnea. The breaths begin slowly and shallowly and gradually increase to above normal volume and rate, then gradually diminish in volume and rate, followed by apnea. Apnea may last 10 to 20 seconds before the cycle is repeated. Seen with respiratory center depression caused by stroke or head injury, pneumonia in the elderly, CHF, or drug overdose.

- **Chest inspection:** This should be performed with the patient seated and with clothing removed above the waist. If the patient is not able to sit in a chair, he or she should be placed in bed in Fowler position (e.g., head of bed elevated 45°). **Inspection should include:**
  - The rate, depth, and regularity of breathing compared with the norms for the patient's age and activity level.
  - Skin color, temperature, and condition, such as bruises or scars. Is the patient diaphoretic?
  - Chest symmetry: Compare one side of the chest with the other.
    - Observe chest excursion while standing in front of the patient to determine whether both sides are expanding equally.
    - Unequal expansion may indicate:
      - Atelectasis
      - Pneumothorax
      - Chest deformities
      - Flail Chest: **Paradoxical** respiations may be observed in which the chest moves in on inspiration and out on expiration. Flail chest is the result of chest trauma, a fractured sternum, or fractured ribs.
    - Shape and size of chest: in comparison with norms
      - Observe the antero-posterior (A-P) diameter.
      - An increased A-P diameter is called a **barrel chest and is indicative of chronic lung desease.**
    - Work of breathing:
      - Should be evaluated to determine the level of breathing difficulty.
      - While observing the patient's breathing process, determine the following factor:
        - Is the chest movement symmetric?
        - Are the accessory muscles being used?
        - What is the shape of the chest?
        - What is the respiratory rate?
        - Is the breathing pattern regular or irregular?
        - Are there any bony deformities of the ribs, spine, or chest?
        - Is the patient's V<sub>T</sub> normal in relation to size and age?
        - Is expiration prolonged, shorter than inspiration, or equal to inspiration?
        - Are substernal, suprasternal, or intercostal retactions or nasal flaring observed?
        - **These are all signs of respiratory distress!**

> :warning: The intercostal muscles and diaphragm are the major muscles for normal ventilation. The accessory muscles are the scalene and the sternomastoid muscles in the neck and the pectoralis major muscle in the anterior chest. When accessory muscles are used during ventilation, it is a sign of respiratory distress. It is the overuse of accessory muscles with chronic obstruive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients that results in an increased A-P diameter.

- **Inspection of the Extremities**
  - **Digital clubbing**
    - Digital clubbing is indicative of long-standing pulmonary disease: 75% to 85% of all clubbing is the result of pulmonary disease.
    - Consists of enlargement of the distal phalanges of the fingers and, less commonly, the toes. There is a loss of the angle between the nail and dorsum of the terminal phalanx.
    - It is the reuslt of **chronic hypoxemia**.
  - **Pedal Edema**
    - This refers to an accumulation of fluid in the subcutaneous tissues of the ankles.
    - This symptom is commonly obsverved in patients with chronic pulmonary disease, in which their chronic hypoxemic state resuls in pulmonary vasoconstriction.
    - The right side of the heart works harder as it pumps blood through narrowed pulmonary vessels, which results in an increased workload on the right side of the heart, right ventriclar hypertrophy, and, eventually, right-sided heart failure (cor pulmonale).
    - As right-sided heart pressures increase, venous blood flow returning to the heart is diminished, and the peripheral blood vessels become engorged. The ankles are most affected as a result of gravity. This is often accompanied by jugular venous distention (JVD). The jugular veins returning blood from the upper body also become engorged as a result of elevated pressure in the right side of the heart.
  - **Cyanosis**
    - Refers to the bluish discoloration of the skin and nail beds resulting from a **5 g/dL decrease in oxygenated hemoglobin (Hb)**. For example, a patient with an Hb level of 1 g/dL would have cyanosis if the O<sub>2</sub> saturation dropped to a level where only 10 g/dL was saturated with O<sub>2</sub>.
    - **Central cyanosis** is present when the oral mucosa and trunk are cyanotic and indicates inadequate tissue oxygenation. **Peripheral cyanosis** (acrocyanosis) is present when the nail beds are cyanotic and may indicate poor perfusion caused by decreased cardiac output, hypotension, or cold temperature.
    - Patients with decreased Hb levels (anemia) may not exhibit cyanosis even if tissue hypoxia is present. An anemic patient has a low O<sub>2</sub>-carrying capacity, which may result in tissue hypoxia but does not cause cyanosis unless 5 g/dL of unsaturated Hb is present. If there is not enough Hb in the blood to manifest it, cyanosis will not occur.
    - Conversely, a patinet with an increased level of Hb (polycythemia) has an increased capacity for carrying O<sub>2</sub>. This patient may have a level of 5 g/dL of unsaturated Hb and therefore may have cyanosis, yet have enough saturated Hb to adequately oxygenate the tissues.
  - **Capillary refill**
    - Perfusion to the extremities may be determined by assessing capillary refill.
    - This is performed by compressing the patient's fingernail for a short itme, then releasing it and observing the time it takes for blood flow to return to the nail bed.
    - Normal refill time is less than 3 seconds.
    - Patients with decreased cardiac output and poor digital perfusion have a longer refill time.
  - **Chest Deformities**
    - **Kyphosis**
      - Concave curvature of the spine, resulting in a "hunchback" appearance. It is best assessed from an anterior view.
      - Caussed by degenerative bone disease or age or may be seen with COPD.
    - **Lordosis**
      - Backward curvature of the lumbar spine, resulting in a "swayback" appearance.
      - Usually not a cause of respiratory difficulties.
    - **Scoliosis**
      - Lateral curvature of the thoracic pine, resulting in chest protrusion posteriorly and the anterior ribs flattening out. Chest protrudes on right or left side.
      - Depending on severity, it may result in impeared lung movement.
    - **Kyphoscoliosis**
      - Combination of kyphosis and scoliosis.
      - May be most adequately observed by notiving different heights of the shoulders.
      - Cardiopulmonary problems do not normally present until patients rach their 40s or 50s.
      - Pulmonary signs and symptoms of kyphoscoliosis:
        - Dyspea
        - Hypoxemia
        - Hypercapnia
        - Progressive respiratory insufficiency
        - Cardiac failure
        - Decreased lung capacity as evidenced by results of pulmonary function tests **(restrictive desease)**
        - Frequent pulmonary infections
        - Uneven ventilation/perfusion ratio
      - **Pectus carinatum**
        - Also called *pigeon breast*; results in the forward projection of the xiphoid process and lower sternum.
        - usually a congenital condition.
        - May cause dyspnea on exercise and more frequent respiratory infections as a result of interference with heart and lung movement.
        - In sever cases, surgical correction may be indicated.
      - **Pectus Excavatum**
        - Also called *funnel chest*; results in a funnel-shaped depression over the lower sternum.
        - Usually a congenital condition.
        - May lead to dyspnea on exertion and more frequent respiratory infections.
      - **Barrel Chest**
        - The natural recoil properties of thelungs are decreased because of air trapping and subsequent hyperinflation. this loss of lung elasticity causes the ribs tomovemmore outward, which causes the barrel appearance.
        - The increased tone and development of the accessory muscles, which are used during breathing by patients with COPD, also contribute to the barrel appearance.
        - Seen almost exclusively in patiens with chronic lung disease.
        - This hkyperinflated state of the lungs pushes down on the diaphragm, which restricts its movement. The diaphragm is a done-shaped muscle that is innervated by the phrenic nerve. contraction of the muscle causes a descease in pressure within the lungs below atmospheric levels, and air enters the airway. Hyperinflated lungs tend to flatten the diaphragm, diminishing its contracting ability. This decreased alveolar ventilaiton and chest excursion, which results in labored breathing.
        - Muscles normally used for ventilation are the **diaphragm and external intercostals**, but because the diaphragm of patients with COPD is flattened, they use their accessory muscles during normal ventilation.
      - **Palpation of the Chest**
        - Use the sense of touch on the chest wall to assess physical signs.
        - Hands are placed on the chest to assess chest meovement and vibration.
        - Vibrations felt on the chest wall as the patient speaks are called *tactile fremitus*. The vibrations originate at the vocal cords and are transmitted down the tracheobronchial tree, through the alveoli to the chest wall.
          - the practitioner places his or her hands on the patient's chest and asks the patient to say certain words, such as 'ninety-nine," as the practitioner palpates ver different areas of the chest.
          - Vibrations are **decreased** over pleural effusions, fluid, pneumothorax, and in overly muscular or obese patients.
          - Vibrations are **increased** over atelactasis, pneumonia, and lung masses.
        - For patients with suspected chest trauma or after thoracic or after thoracis surgery, assess for subcutaneous emphysema and crepitus. After chest trauma with leak into the suvcutaneous tissues (suvcutaneous emphysema). Palpating over suvcutaneous air feels like cracking under the skin, which is referred to as *crepitus*.
        - Position fo the trachea.
          - Assessed by placing both thumbs on each side of the suprasternal notch and gently pressing inward. Only soft tissure should be palpable. If the trachea is felt, it indicates that the trachea has shifted and is no longer positioned midline as it should be.
          - A shift of the position of the trachea may be the result of a tension pneumothorax or massive atelactasis.
            - Tension pneumothorax: **trachea shifts to the unaffected side (opposite side of pneumothorax).**
            - Atelactasis: **trachea shifts to the afftected side (same side as atelectasis).**
      - Percussion of the Chest Wall
        - This involve tapping on the chest directly with one finger or indiractly by placing one finger on a chest area and tapping on that finger over different areas of the chest.
        - There are five different sounds heard during percussion.
          - Hyperresonance
            - a loud, low-pitched sound of long duration that is produced over areas that contain a greater proportion of air than tissue.
              - Examples are air-filled stomach, emphysema (air trapping), pneumothorax.
            - Resonance
              - A low-pitched sound of long duratin that is produced over area with equal distribution of air and tissue.
                - An example is normal lung tissue.
            - Dullness
              - A sound of medium intensity and pitch of short duratin that is produced over area that contain a higher proportion of tissure of fluid than air.
              - Examples include atelectasis, consolidation, pleural effusion, pleural thickening pulmonary edema.
            - Flatness
              - A sound of low amplitude and pitch that is produced over areas that contain a higher proportion of tissue than air.
                - Examples include massive pleural effusion, massive atelectasis, pneumonectomy.
              - Tympany
                - A drumlike sound.
                  - Examples include tension pneumothorax.
      - Auscultation of Breath Sounds
        - Normal breath sounds
          - Vesicular
            - gentle rusting sound heard over the entire chest wall, except the right supraclavicular area. In a healthy person, vesicular sounds are often difficult to hear.
            - Inspiration is longer than expiration, with no pause between.
          - Bronchial
            - Loud and generally high-pitched sound heard over the upper portion of the sternum, trachea, and both mainstem bronchi.
            - Expiration is longer than inspiration, with a short pause between.
            - If heard in other lung areas, it indicates atelectasis or consolidation.
          - Bronchovesicular
            - a combination of bronchial and vesicular breath sounds, normally heard over the sternum, between the scapulae, and over the right apex of the lung.
            - Inspiration and expiration are of eaul duration, with no ause between.
          - Tracheal
            - Harsh and high-pitched sound heard over the trachea.
            - Expiration is slightly longer than inspiration.
        - Adventitious breath sounds
          - Abnormal breath sounds superimposed on normal breath sounds.
          - Classified as **crackles** (discontinuous sounds) and **wheezes** (continuous sounds).
            - Crackles
              - A bubbling or crackling sound that can be heard during inspiration or expiration and that is produced by air flowing through airways containing secretions of fluid.
              - Early inspiratory crackels, or crackles occuring in the early part of inspiration, are the result of larger proximal airways collapsing during expiration and are heard most commonly in patiens with emphysema, chronic bronchitis, or asthma.
              - When peripheral alveoli and airways collapse during exhalation, late inspiratory crackles are heard as these airways pop open. Late inspiraory cracklea are most commonly heard in patients with pulmonary edema, atelectasis,
              pneumonia, or restrictive lung disorders such as pulmonary fibrosis.
            - Wheezes
              - Breath sounds with a musical quality that are produced as air flows through constricted airways.
              - Airways may become constricted as a result of bronchospasm, mucosal edema, excessive sputum, or presence of foreign bodies.
              - May be heard onboth inspiration and expiration.
              - Wheezes may be heard with asthma, bronchieits, CHF, and foreign body obstruction.
            - Rhonchi
              - Used to describe low-pitched, continuous abnormal lung sounds.
              - Low-pitched coarse crackles that are continuous are often referred to as rhonchi. They are actually classified as wheezes and indictae secretions in the airway.
              - although rhonchi may be used on the exam to indicate that the patint needs to cough or be suctiond, it is an outdated term and shouldn't be used.
            - Stridor
              - Most commonly heard during inspiration and produced as air passes through a norrowed upper airway structure such as the glottis (glottic edema).
              - the diameter of the upper airway may be decreased as a result of infection, as in epiglottitis or croup, or with inflammation and swelling of the glottic area after extubation.
              - Stridor is a life-threatening sign that ventilaio is compromosed and tht immediate intervention is necessary.
            - Pleural frinction rub
              - A clicking or grating sound caused by friction that is produced as the parietal and visceral pleura rub against each other during the breating process.
              - Most commonly associated with pleurisy. It is very painful.
      - Auscultation of Heart Sounds
        - **Normal heart sounds:** heart sounds are throught to be produced as a result of sudden changes in blood flow through the heart that cause a vibration of the valves and chambers inside the heart. The normal heart sound is a "lubb-dub" sound.
          - The heart sound ("lubb") represents the closing of the atrioventricular (AV) valves.
            - The AV valves are the mitral valve (between) the left atrium and left ventricle) and the tricuspid valve (between th eright atrium and right ventricle).
            - The first heart sound is designated **S<sub>1</sub>**.
          - The seceond heart sound ("dub") represents the closing of the semilunar valves.
            - The semilunar valves consit of the pulmonic valve (between the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery) and the aortic valve (between the left ventricle and aorta).
            - The second heart sound is designated **S<sub>2</sub>**.
          -Third and fourth heart sounds **(S<sub>3</sub> and S<sub>4</sub>)** may be heard, but they are more difficult to hear than S<sub>1</sub> and S<sub>2</sub> and are more easily heart in children.
            - **S<sub>3</sub>** is though ro result from blood rushing into the ventricles during ealy ventricular diastole.
            - **S<sub>4</sub>** is though to result from atrial contraction.
          - Abnormal heart sounds (murmurs)
            - Murmurs usually occur when blood flows in a turbulent fashion through heart structures that have a decreased cross-sectional area.
            - Murmurs are described by the location of the sound, the part of the cardiac cycle in which they occur, and the intensity of the sound.
            - Conditions resulting in heart murmurs:
              - Aortic valve disease (e.g., stenosis, regurgitation)
              - Mitral valve disease (e.g., stenosis, regurgitation)
              - Pulmonic valve stenosis
              - Tricuspid valve insufficiency
            - An abnormal sound heard over the heart, arteries, or veins that is caused by turbulent blood flow or an obstruction is referred to as a *bruit*.
      - Chest x-ray Interpretation
        - Useful terms when interpreting chest x-rays:
          - **Consolidation:** well-defined, soldi-appearing lung that appears light and is **caused by **pneumonia.**
          - **Radiopaque:** white areas that indicate fluids and solids (also referred to as *opacity* or *opacification*) and that are **caused, for example, by pneumonia and pleural effusion.**
          - **Infiltrates:** scattered or patchy white areas that are **caused by inflammatory processes** that indicate **atelectasis or disease.**
          - **Radiolucency:** dark areas **caused by the presence of air;** hyperlucency is characteristic of emphysema, asthma, or subcutaneous emphysema.
        - Chest radiograph positions
          - Postero-anterior (P-A)
            - This is the most commonly used position.
            - The patient is positioned upright, and the image is obtained during a maximal inspiration.
            - The x-ray passes through the chest from back (posterior) to front (anterior), and the film is anterior to the patient's chest.
          - A-P
            - This position is often used for portable radiographs in the intensive care areas.
            - The x-ray passes through the chest from anterior to posterior.
            - The heart is more easily seen in this position, but the quality of the film is inferior to the P-A film.
          - Lateral
            - The image is obtained from the side with the patient upright while the x-ray passes through the chest laterally.
          - Oblique
            - This image is obtained with the patient turned 45 degrees to either the right or left.
            - This position is used to help differentiate a pulmonary or mediastinal lesion from structures that overlie it. This view is often used when bilateral lesions are present.
            - This position is also used for ventilation/perfusion scanning.
          - Apical lordotic
            - In an upright position, the patient leans back at a 45° angle.
            - This position moves the shadow of the clavicles out of the way for better visualization of the upper lobes of the lungs.
          - Lateral decubitus
            - The image is obtained with the patient lying on his or her side (side-lying position) with the film resting on the posterior surface of the chest.
            - This position is used to identify whether free fluid (pleural effusion or blood) is present in the chest. Fluid drains to the dependent area of the lung-the lung the patient is lying on-and creates a shadow. For example, if right-sided fluid is suspected, the patient shoud be placed on the right side.
            - This view is also helpful in determining the presence of a pneumothorax. Because air rises, the patient should be placed on the left side if a right pneumothorax is suspected.

> :warning: Chest radiographs are usually obtained with the patient at maximal inspiration, which should show the lungs well aerated and the diaphragm descended to about the level of the tenth rib. An image obtained on expiration may be beneficial in detecting a small pneumothorax that othewise would be difficult to see on a routine inspiratory film. As the patient exhales, the lung volume is reduced while the pleural air volume remains the same. The pneumothorax then occupies more of the thoracic volume and may be better visualized.

- Evaluating conditions on chest x-ray
  - Atelectasis
    - appears lighter than normal lung tissue.
    - May be indicated by elevated diaphragm, mediastinal shift (toward area of atelectasis), or increased density and decreased voume of a lung area.
  - Pneumonia
    - Appears white.
    - Consolidation of entire lobe or more may cause **mediastinal shift toward the consolidation.**
  - Pneumothorax
    - Air found in the pleural cavity appears dark with no vascular marking in the onvolved areas.
    - **Tension pneumothorax** may result in a mediastinal shift and a tracheal **shift away from the side of the pneumothroax.**
  - ET tube placement
    - The tube should rest about 2 to 5 cm above the carina. On an inspiratory film, the carina is located at the level of the fourth rib or fourth thoracic vertebra.
    - If the ET tube is inserted too far, it has a greater tendency to enter **the right mainstem bronchus.**
    - If the right mainstem is inadvertently intubated, breath sounds will be absent on the left, and asymmetric chest movement may be observed.
  - Heart shadow
    - Should appear white in the middle of the chest, and thelft heart border should be easily determined.
    - A normal heart should be less than half the width of the chest at the level of the diaphragm. Increased heart size may indicate CHF.
  - Diaphragm
    - Should be rounded or dome shaped.
    - Appears white on x-ray film at the level of the tenth rib during a maximal inspiration. Ten ribs should be counted above the diaphragm to  determine whether a maximal inspiration is present.
    - Patients with hyperinflated lungs (as in COPD) have flattened diaphragms.
    - Both hemidiaphragms should be assessed for height and angle to the chest wall.
    - The dome of the right hemidiaphragm is normally 1 to 2 cm higher than that of the left because of space needed for the liver.
    - Elevation of one hemidiaphragm may be the result fo gas i the stomach or of atelectasis.
    - Determine proper exposure
      - Determining the penetration of the x-ray is done by assessing the spinal processes in the chest. They should be just barely disinguishable from each other. If the spinal processes are very distinct, with dark lines separating them, the film is overexposed.
      - An overexposed x-ray appears darker and cold be interpreted as normal.
      - an underexposed x-ray appears lighter and cuold reuslt inan incorrect interpretation.
- Pulse
  - Pulse is a direct indicator of the heart's action.
  - Normal heart rate in an adult: 60 to 100 beats/min.
  - Normal heart rate in child: 80 to 110 beats/min.
  - Normal heart rate in newborn: 90 to 170 beats/min.
  - An abnormally low heart rate is called **bradycardia** and is caused by infection, hypothermia, heart abnormalities, and vagal stimulation.
  - An abnormally high heart rate is called **tachycardia** and is caused by hypoxemia, fever, loss of blood volume, heart abnormalities, and anxiety.
  - **Peripheral edema and venous engorgement** indicate inadequate pumping action of the heart resulting from cor pulmonale, often seen in chronic lung disease, or left-sided heart failure (CHF).
  - **Paradoxical pulse** (pulsus paradoxus) is a pule that vecomes weaker on sinspiration; it may be defined as a decrease in systolic pressure of more than 10 mm Hg during inspiraiton and may be seen in patiens with sever COPD, including asthma, pericarditis, pulmonary  embolism, CHF, and pericardial effusion. If paradoxical pulse is oberved after chest trauma or cardiothoracic surgery, cardiac tamponade should be suspected. Cardiac tomponade is a lifte-threatening condition in ehich blood collects in the pericardial sac and causes pressure that prevents the heart from pumping adequately.
  - **Pulsus alternans** is an alternating pattern of strong and eak pulses. The ventricle ejects more than the normal amount of blood with a contraction and then less than the normal amont of blood with the next contraction. This is commonly oberved in patinets with left ventricular failure (LVF) and sually iindicates bigeminal premature ventricular contractions (PVCs).
- Blood Pressure
  - Blood pressure is measurement of the pressure within hte arterial system.
  - Normal range for adults: <120/80




## IV. ASSESSMENT OF LABORATORY TEST RESULTS

## V. REVIEWING THE PATIENT CHART

